Anurag University
23EG106C49_AI_P.Lakshmi 
Narasimha_Article_PC2_05-10-2026.pdf
 
Document Details
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355
Submission Date
Oct 5, 2026, 2:13 PM GMT+5:30
Download Date
Oct 5, 2026, 4:00 PM GMT+5:30
File Name
23EG106C49_AI_P.Lakshmi Narasimha_Article_PC2_05-10-2026.pdf
File Size
241.4 KB
5 Pages
3,084 Words
19,368 Characters
Page 1 of 7 - Cover Page
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355
Page 1 of 7 - Cover Page
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355

--- PAGE BREAK ---
23% detected as AI
The percentage indicates the combined amount of likely AI-generated text as 
well as likely AI-generated text that was also likely revised by AI.
Caution: Review required.
It is essential to understand the limitations of AI detection before making decisions 
about a student’s work. We encourage you to learn more about Turnitin’s AI detection 
capabilities before using the tool.
11
AI-generated
23%
Likely generated or likely generated and revised by AI.
Disclaimer
Our AI writing assessment is designed to help educators identify text that might be prepared by a generative AI tool. Our AI writing assessment may not always be accurate (it may misidentify 
writing that is likely human generated as AI generated and likely AI generated as human generated) so it should not be used as the sole basis for adverse actions against a student. It takes 
further scrutiny and human judgment in conjunction with an organization's application of its specific academic policies to determine whether any academic misconduct has occurred.
Page 2 of 7 - AI Writing Overview
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355
Page 2 of 7 - AI Writing Overview
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355

--- PAGE BREAK ---
A Multilingual V oice-Enabled Dual-Index RAG
Framework for Agricultural Advisory and
Government Scheme Assistance
Abstract—Smallholder farmers frequently require two dis-
tinct forms of information: practical agricultural guidance for
crop and plant problems, and administrative information about
government schemes, subsidies, credit facilities, insurance, and
eligibility. Conventional large language model (LLM) chatbots
can provide fluent responses but may retrieve or generate
information outside the intended domain, while language and
literacy barriers can limit accessibility. This paper presents
a multilingual, voice-enabled, dual-index Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) framework designed to address these issues.
The proposed system maintains separate knowledge bases for
agricultural diagnostics and government benefit schemes, with
independent FAISS dense indices, BM25 sparse retrieval, and
SQLite metadata stores. Query processing combines dense se-
mantic retrieval with sparse lexical retrieval, Maximal Marginal
Relevance (MMR), and Cross-Encoder reranking. A multilingual
pipeline supports English, Hindi, Telugu, and Tamil through
script-based language detection, adaptive translation, Faster-
Whisper speech recognition, and Edge-TTS speech synthesis.
The generation layer is provider-agnostic and supports local
and cloud LLM inference. An evaluation framework measures
Faithfulness, Context Precision, Context Recall, and Answer
Relevance, with baseline configurations for direct LLM, dense-
only RAG, and sparse-only RAG. The architecture is intended to
reduce domain contamination, improve retrieval precision, and
make agricultural information more accessible through text and
voice interaction.
Index Terms —Retrieval-Augmented Generation, agricultural
AI, multilingual NLP, voice chatbot, hybrid retrieval, BM25,
FAISS, Cross-Encoder, government schemes, domain isolation
I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Motivation
Agriculture is an information-intensive domain in which
timely access to reliable knowledge can influence crop man-
agement, disease response, fertilizer use, and access to public
support programs. Smallholder farmers may need answers that
combine technical agricultural knowledge with administrative
information about welfare schemes. However, these two infor-
mation categories have different semantics and different risks.
Crop diagnosis may involve symptoms, treatment practices,
pesticides, or fertilizer recommendations, whereas government
schemes involve eligibility rules, documentation, benefits,
deadlines, and application procedures.
The project addresses this problem through a conversational
AI system that combines Retrieval-Augmented Generation
with multilingual and voice interaction. The system is ex-
plicitly organized around two isolated domains: agricultural
diagnostics and government schemes. This separation is in-
tended to reduce retrieval contamination between technically
different knowledge sources while maintaining a common
conversational interface.
B. Challenges in Existing RAG Systems
A conventional single-index RAG system can retrieve se-
mantically similar passages from unrelated parts of a corpus.
In an agricultural assistant, this may cause a query about crop
disease to retrieve government-scheme passages, or a question
about subsidy eligibility to retrieve agronomic advice. In addi-
tion, dense retrieval may overlook exact policy terms, scheme
names, document identifiers, or crop-specific keywords that
are well handled by lexical retrieval. Conversely, purely lexical
retrieval can miss semantically related passages expressed with
different terminology. These observations motivate a hybrid
retrieval architecture.
Accessibility presents a second challenge. Farmers may
prefer regional languages or spoken interaction rather than
English text input. The proposed system therefore incorporates
automatic speech recognition, language identification, machine
translation fallback, and multilingual speech synthesis.
C. Research Objectives
The main objectives are:
• design a domain-isolated dual-index RAG architecture for
agricultural advisory and government benefit navigation;
• combine dense semantic retrieval and sparse BM25 re-
trieval to improve candidate recall;
• apply Cross-Encoder reranking to improve the ordering
of retrieved evidence;
• support English, Hindi, Telugu, and Tamil through adap-
tive multilingual query processing;
• provide voice input and voice output to improve accessi-
bility; and
• establish an evaluation framework for faithfulness, con-
text quality, answer relevance, recall, and system latency.
D. Contributions
The principal contributions are:
• an isolated dual knowledge-base architecture with inde-
pendent dense/sparse indices and metadata stores;
• a hybrid BM25–FAISS retrieval strategy with score nor-
malization and MMR diversity ranking;
Page 3 of 7 - AI Writing Submission
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355
Page 3 of 7 - AI Writing Submission
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355

--- PAGE BREAK ---
• Cross-Encoder reranking using BAAI/bge-reranker-base
and weighted score fusion;
• an adaptive multilingual query-routing pipeline with
translation caching;
• a voice-enabled interface using Faster-Whisper ASR and
Edge-TTS; and
• a reproducible evaluation framework with direct-LLM,
dense-RAG, and sparse-RAG baselines.
II. R ELATED WORK
Retrieval-Augmented Generation combines information re-
trieval with generative language models so that responses
can be conditioned on external evidence rather than relying
exclusively on parametric model knowledge. Dense retrieval
represents queries and documents in continuous vector spaces
and is effective for semantic matching. Sparse methods such
as BM25 emphasize exact lexical overlap and remain valuable
for specialized terminology, names, identifiers, and policy
language. Hybrid retrieval combines these complementary
signals.
Reranking provides a further refinement stage. A Cross-
Encoder jointly processes a query and candidate document,
allowing richer pairwise relevance estimation than independent
embedding similarity. In multilingual conversational systems,
speech recognition, language identification, machine transla-
tion, and speech synthesis can form an accessibility layer over
a retrieval and generation backend.
The proposed work combines these established components
with domain isolation. Its research focus is the system-level
integration of domain-isolated retrieval, hybrid ranking, mul-
tilingual routing, voice interaction, and evaluation for agricul-
tural advisory and benefit navigation.
III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION
Let Q denote a user query and let M ∈ { A, G} represent
the selected domain, where A is agricultural diagnostics and
G is government schemes. Each domain maintains its own
corpus DM , dense index FM , sparse index BM , and metadata
store SM . Retrieval is restricted to the selected domain:
R(Q, M) = Retrieve( Q, FM , BM ). (1)
The retrieved candidate set is reranked using a Cross-Encoder.
The resulting evidence is supplied to an LLM through a
grounded prompt. For multilingual input, the system first
identifies the language and either retrieves directly from native-
language documents or translates the query to English when
native documents are unavailable.
IV. P ROPOSED SYSTEM METHODOLOGY
A. Overall Architecture
The system follows a layered architecture. A farmer or
extension worker interacts with a Streamlit interface through
text or microphone input. V oice input is transcribed using
Faster-Whisper. Language detection then determines the pro-
cessing route. The selected domain routes the query to either
the agricultural or government-scheme knowledge base. Each
TABLE I
MAJOR SYSTEM LAYERS
Layer Components Purpose
Interface Streamlit Text/voice interaction and dis-
play
API FastAPI Asynchronous REST backend
Language Script detection,
translation, Faster-
Whisper, Edge-TTS
Multilingual voice pipeline
Domain Agriculture / Gov-
ernment Schemes
Knowledge-base isolation
Retrieval FAISS + BM25 +
MMR
Candidate retrieval and diver-
sity
Reranking BGE reranker Fine-grained relevance order-
ing
Generation Ollama / Groq Grounded response generation
Storage SQLite + FAISS Metadata, embeddings,
indices, caches
knowledge base contains a FAISS dense index, a SimpleBM25
sparse index, and SQLite metadata. Hybrid retrieval produces
candidates, MMR reduces redundancy, and a Cross-Encoder
reranks the candidates. A prompt builder constrains the LLM
to use retrieved evidence. Responses are cached and may be
synthesized into speech.
B. Document Ingestion and Chunking
Documents are parsed from multiple formats, metadata is
extracted, and text is recursively segmented using hierarchical
separators. The configured target chunk length is 1000 char-
acters with an overlap of 200 characters:
Chunki = D[si : si + L], s i+1 = si + L − O, (2)
where L = 1000 and O = 200 . The overlap preserves
continuity across chunk boundaries and reduces the risk that
a relevant statement is separated from its supporting context.
C. Dense Retrieval
The dense retrieval component uses BAAI/bge-small-en-
v1.5 to represent queries and document chunks in a 384-
dimensional embedding space. FAISS is used for efficient
nearest-neighbor search. Cosine similarity is computed as
Sdense(Q, D) = vq · vd
∥vq∥2∥vd∥2
. (3)
D. Sparse BM25 Retrieval
The sparse component uses a pure-Python SimpleBM25
implementation. Okapi BM25 scores documents according to
term frequency, inverse document frequency, and document-
length normalization:
SBM25(Q, D) =
X
i
IDF (qi)
× f (qi, D)(k1 + 1)
f (qi, D) + k1(1 − b + b|D|/avgdl) .
(4)
with k1 = 1.5 and b = 0.75.
Page 4 of 7 - AI Writing Submission
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355
Page 4 of 7 - AI Writing Submission
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355

--- PAGE BREAK ---
E. Hybrid Retrieval
Because BM25 scores are not naturally bounded in the same
way as cosine similarity, the BM25 score is normalized against
the maximum score among candidate documents. The final
hybrid score is
Shybrid = αSdense + (1 − α)eSBM25, (5)
where α = 0.5 and
eSBM25(D) = SBM25(D)
maxd′∈C SBM25(d′) . (6)
F . Maximal Marginal Relevance
MMR is used to reduce redundant retrieval:
MMR = arg max
Di

λS(Q, Di) − (1 − λ) max
Dj ∈S
S(Di, Dj)

,
(7)
where the configured diversity coefficient is λ = 0.5.
G. Cross-Encoder Reranking
The top hybrid candidates are passed to BAAI/bge-reranker-
base. The raw reranking logit is converted through a sigmoid
function:
σ(z) = 1
1 + e−z . (8)
The final score is
Scombined = 0.4Shybrid + 0.6σ(zrerank). (9)
This weighted fusion gives the Cross-Encoder a greater con-
tribution to final ordering while retaining information from the
initial hybrid retrieval stage.
H. Grounded Generation and Caching
The prompt builder supplies selected evidence and imposes
grounding constraints and multilingual response requirements.
The RAG chain coordinates conversation history, retrieval,
reranking, prompt construction, response caching, confidence
estimation, and LLM invocation. A sliding conversation win-
dow of five turns provides conversational context without
allowing unbounded history growth.
V. M ULTILINGUAL AND VOICE PIPELINE
A. Speech Recognition
V oice input is processed with Faster-Whisper. The im-
plementation supports int8 execution on CPU/CUDA and is
configured for speech recognition with automatic language
detection. The implementation targets low-latency processing;
the target reported by the project should be verified experi-
mentally on the final deployment hardware.
B. Language Detection and Translation
The language helper uses Unicode script ranges for rapid
identification of Devanagari, Telugu, and Tamil text. English
queries can be searched directly. For non-English queries,
the system checks whether native-language documents are
available. If not, the query is translated to English before
retrieval. Translation results are cached in SQLite to reduce
repeated translation overhead.
TABLE II
IMPLEMENTATION STACK
Module Implementation
Frontend Streamlit
Backend FastAPI + Uvicorn
Dense embeddings BAAI/bge-small-en-v1.5
Vector search FAISS
Sparse search SimpleBM25
Reranking BAAI/bge-reranker-base
Local LLM Ollama with Qwen2.5 7B / Llama 3.2
Cloud LLM Groq with supported Llama/Mixtral mod-
els
ASR Faster-Whisper
TTS Edge-TTS; gTTS fallback
Metadata/cache SQLite
Languages English, Hindi, Telugu, Tamil
C. Speech Synthesis
Edge-TTS is used for neural speech synthesis. The con-
figured voices include en-US-GuyNeural for English, hi-IN-
MadhurNeural for Hindi, te-IN-MohanNeural for Telugu, and
ta-IN-ValluvarNeural for Tamil.
VI. G OVERNMENT SCHEME KNOWLEDGE BASE
The government-scheme module is a separate knowledge
domain rather than an additional collection mixed into the
agricultural diagnostic index. It is intended to support ques-
tions about schemes, subsidies, eligibility, benefits, documen-
tation, and application-related guidance. The separate inges-
tion pipeline and storage structure allow the system to route
scheme questions only to the scheme corpus while preserving
the agricultural diagnostic corpus for plant and crop queries.
This separation is important because the two domains con-
tain different types of entities and decision criteria. A scheme
query may depend on farmer category, location, eligibility
conditions, or required documents, whereas a crop query
may depend on symptoms, disease indicators, or management
recommendations.
VII. S YSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
The backend exposes query, voice-query, history, document,
and health endpoints. The LLM layer uses an abstract client
interface and factory pattern, allowing local and cloud in-
ference providers to be switched without changing the RAG
orchestration layer.
The architecture also accounts for constrained deploy-
ment environments. Heavy neural models can create memory
pressure on low-memory cloud instances; therefore, model
loading, embedding generation, and remote inference should
be evaluated separately when deploying to resource-limited
infrastructure.
VIII. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
The research evaluation should be conducted using a bench-
mark set containing representative questions from both do-
mains. The agricultural portion should include crop symptoms,
disease identification, treatment guidance, fertilizer and man-
agement questions. The government portion should include
Page 5 of 7 - AI Writing Submission
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355
Page 5 of 7 - AI Writing Submission
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355

--- PAGE BREAK ---
TABLE III
BASELINE CONFIGURATIONS
Configuration Description
Direct LLM LLM answers without retrieval evidence
Dense RAG FAISS-based semantic retrieval
Sparse RAG BM25-only retrieval
Hybrid RAG FAISS + BM25 score fusion
Hybrid + Reranker Hybrid retrieval followed by Cross-
Encoder
Proposed Dual-
Index RAG
Domain isolation + hybrid retrieval +
reranking + multilingual routing
scheme eligibility, benefits, documents, application proce-
dures, and related administrative questions. Queries should be
distributed across English, Hindi, Telugu, and Tamil where
appropriate.
A. Baselines
B. Evaluation Metrics
The implemented evaluator measures four semantic RAG
metrics. Faithfulness estimates whether generated answer sen-
tences are supported by retrieved context. Context Precision
measures semantic relevance of retrieved chunks to the query.
Answer Relevance measures similarity between the query
and generated response. Context Recall measures whether
reference information is represented in the retrieved context.
The current implementation uses a semantic similarity
threshold of 0.65 for sentence-level faithfulness and recall
decisions:
Faithfulness = 1
|SA|
X
s
I

max
c
Sim(s, c) ≥ 0.65

. (10)
ContextPrecision = 1
k
X
i
Sim(Q, Ci). (11)
AnswerRelevance = Sim(Embed(Q), Embed(R)). (12)
ContextRecall = 1
|G|
X
g
I

max
c
Sim(g, c) ≥ 0.65

. (13)
C. Additional System Metrics
Additional measurements should include retrieval latency,
reranking latency, LLM generation latency, end-to-end latency,
ASR latency, translation latency and cache-hit rate, retrieval
Precision@K/Recall@K or MRR where ground-truth rele-
vance labels are available, and cross-domain retrieval contam-
ination rate.
IX. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The numerical values below are retained from the supplied
project benchmark tables. They should be treated as experi-
mental results only if they correspond to an actual executed
benchmark run with the stated configuration and dataset.
A. Retrieval Component Ablation Study
B. Multilingual Evaluation
C. Discussion
The primary research hypothesis is that domain isolation
can reduce irrelevant cross-domain evidence, while hybrid
retrieval can improve robustness to both semantic variation
and exact terminology. The reranker is expected to improve
final candidate ordering at additional computational cost.
Multilingual translation fallback increases language coverage
when native documents are unavailable, but introduces an
additional translation stage that should be reflected in latency
measurements. V oice interaction improves accessibility but
introduces ASR and TTS overhead. These hypotheses should
be confirmed or rejected using measured results rather than
assumed.
D. Domain Contamination Analysis
A particularly relevant experiment is to construct mixed-
domain queries and measure how often the retrieved top-
k evidence contains chunks from the wrong domain. This
directly tests the central architectural motivation.
X. L IMITATIONS
The quality of answers depends on the completeness, cor-
rectness, freshness, and language coverage of the underlying
documents. Translation fallback may introduce semantic er-
rors, especially for agricultural terminology and policy-specific
phrases. The current semantic evaluation metrics depend on
embedding similarity thresholds and therefore do not replace
expert human evaluation. Cross-Encoder reranking improves
relevance estimation but increases computational cost and
latency. Cloud deployment on low-memory instances may
require remote embeddings, lazy model loading, or higher-
resource infrastructure. Government scheme information can
change over time; production deployment requires systematic
document versioning and update procedures. The architecture
should not be described as eliminating hallucination; this must
be evaluated empirically.
XI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented a dual-index, multilingual, voice-
enabled RAG architecture for agricultural advisory and gov-
ernment benefit navigation. The proposed system separates
agricultural diagnostics from government schemes, combines
dense FAISS retrieval with sparse BM25 retrieval, applies
MMR for diversity and Cross-Encoder reranking for relevance
refinement, and integrates multilingual voice processing. The
modular implementation supports both local and cloud LLM
inference and includes an evaluation framework for quantita-
tive validation.
Future work includes larger multilingual benchmark
datasets, expert evaluation by agricultural specialists, policy-
document freshness monitoring, improved cross-lingual re-
trieval, domain-specific embedding models, stronger eligi-
bility reasoning for government schemes, on-device infer-
ence, and systematic latency/memory optimization for edge
Page 6 of 7 - AI Writing Submission
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355
Page 6 of 7 - AI Writing Submission
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355

--- PAGE BREAK ---
TABLE IV
QUANTITATIVE PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKS ACROSS RAG S YSTEM ARCHITECTURES
System Architecture Faithfulness Context Precision Context Recall Answer Relevance Latency
(%) (%) (%) (%) (ms)
Direct LLM (No RAG) 22.4 – – 58.2 1850
Sparse BM25 RAG 71.5 61.8 78.5 69.4 320
Dense FAISS RAG 81.2 68.4 85.0 76.8 380
Hybrid RAG (FAISS + BM25) 88.6 72.8 92.5 81.5 410
Hybrid + Cross-Encoder Reranker 94.2 75.4 100.0 86.8 680
Proposed Dual-Index RAG 96.5 78.2 100.0 89.5 710
TABLE V
RETRIEVAL COMPONENT ABLATION STUDY
Component Variant Research Question Empirical Finding and Measured Result
Dense Only How well does semantic retrieval
perform alone?
Achieves 68.4% Precision and 85.0% Recall. Strong on concept matching, but misses specific crop
disease names and numerical fertilizer ratios.
BM25 Only How well does lexical matching per-
form alone?
Achieves 61.8% Precision and 78.5% Recall. Captures exact policy keywords, but fails on synonymous
phrasing.
Dense + BM25 (Hybrid) Does score fusion improve candi-
date quality?
Boosts Context Recall to 92.5% and Precision to 72.8%. Candidate overlap between Dense and Sparse
is only 11.1%, indicating strong complementarity.
Hybrid + MMR ( λ =
0.5)
Does diversity ranking reduce re-
dundant context?
Reduces context sentence redundancy by 42.6%, optimizing token efficiency without loss in recall.
Hybrid + Reranker Does pairwise reranking improve
top-k ordering?
Achieves 100.0% Context Recall and increases Faithfulness to 94.2% by placing the most relevant
diagnostic chunk at Top 1 ( Scombined = 0 .9179).
Dual-Index Isolation Does domain separation reduce
cross-domain retrieval?
Reported cross-domain wrong-domain retrieval decreases from 31.4% to 0.0%.
TABLE VI
MULTILINGUAL AND VOICE PIPELINE BENCHMARK
Language Text Precision / Recall Voice Precision / Recall ASR WER (%) Latency (ms)
English 78.2 / 100.0 76.5 / 98.0 4.2 710
Hindi 74.8 / 95.5 72.1 / 93.0 7.8 1120
Telugu 72.5 / 94.0 69.8 / 91.5 9.4 1180
Tamil 71.9 / 93.5 68.9 / 90.5 9.8 1210
deployment. A further research direction is an explicit
domain-contamination benchmark comparing mixed-index and
domain-isolated retrieval under controlled query sets.
XII. R EPRODUCIBILITY
The project can be executed locally using:
uvicorn backend.api:app --host 0.0.0.0
--port 8000 --reload
streamlit run app.py
python -m evaluation.benchmark_runner
The implementation includes dedicated ingestion pipelines for
agricultural documents and government schemes, separate re-
TABLE VII
CROSS -DOMAIN RETRIEVAL CONTAMINATION BENCHMARK
Domain Query Set Single Mixed In-
dex
Proposed Dual-
Index
Crop Diagnostic
Queries
28.5% 0.0%
Government
Scheme Queries
34.2% 0.0%
Overall Contamina-
tion Rate
31.4% 0.0%
trieval storage, evaluation scripts, and baseline configurations,
enabling controlled experiments and reproducibility.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Rupavatharam, M. Patil, S. Mitnala, N. Katakamsetti, and N. N.
Reddy, “AI Research Assistant in Dryland Agriculture – Retrieval Aug-
mented Generation Based Chat Bot for Literature Review,” ICRISAT,
2026.
[2] “AI Chatbot for Farmers: Transforming Agriculture,” International Jour-
nal of Multidisciplinary Research and Growth Evaluation, 2025.
[3] “CropGuard: Empowering Agriculture with AI Driven Plant Disease
Detection Chatbot,” International Journal of Intelligent Systems and
Applications in Engineering (IJISAE), 2024.
[4] “AI Powered Agriculture Optimization Chatbot Using Retrieval-
Augmented Generation and Generative AI,” in Proceedings of an IEEE
Conference, 2025.
[5] “Empowering Farmers with AI: A Chatbot for On-Demand Agricultural
Knowledge,” in Proceedings of an IEEE Conference, 2025.
Page 7 of 7 - AI Writing Submission
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355
Page 7 of 7 - AI Writing Submission
Submission ID
trn:oid:::3618:153715355

--- PAGE BREAK ---
