THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872 (ACT NO. 1 OF 1872)
Jurisdiction: India
Enacted: 15 March 1872

CHAPTER II — OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS: ADMISSIONS AND CONFESSIONS

Section 24. Confession caused by inducement, threat or promise, when irrelevant in criminal proceeding.
A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a criminal proceeding, if the making of the confession appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement, threat or promise, having reference to the charge against the accused person, proceeding from a person in authority and sufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the accused person grounds, which would appear to him reasonable, for supposing that by making it he would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in reference to the proceedings against him.

Section 25. Confession to police officer not to be proved.
No confession made to a police officer, shall be proved as against a person accused of any offence.

Section 26. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved against him.
No confession made by any person whilst the is in the custody of a police officer, unless it be made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate, shall be proved as against such person.

Section 27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.
Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.

Section 28. Confession made after removal of impression caused by inducement, threat or promise relevant.
If such a confession as is referred to in section 24 is made after the impression caused by any such inducement, threat or promise has, in the opinion of the Court, been fully removed, it is relevant.

Section 29. Confession otherwise relevant not to become irrelevant because of promise of secrecy, etc.
If such a confession is otherwise relevant, it docs not become irrelevant merely because it was made under a promise of secrecy, or in consequence of a deception practiced on the accused person for the purpose of obtaining it, or when he was drunk, or because it was made in answer to questions which he need not have answered, whatever may have been the form of those questions, or because he was not warned that he was not bound to make such confession, and that evidence of it might be given against him.

Section 30. Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it and others jointly under trial for same offence.
When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the same offence, and a confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such persons is proved, the Court may take into consideration such confession as against such other person as well as against the person who makes such confession.
